So I'm going to go into
the scratch pad over here,
and we're going to start by creating
a very simple state machine.
That's doesn't need any libraries,
it's just, we're going to be using
just a switch statement and we're
going to be modeling a simple prompt.
So I'm just going to have over here,
function, let's just call this transition.
And so this is going to describe
transitioning the states or
describing what the next state should
be given this current state in events.
And we're going to be
describing like I said,
a simple fetch flow, so
we have state and event.
And so,
typically we would start by saying or
by having a switch on the events dot type.
So this is assuming that the events
looks like type FETCH or
it could have other payload
like that in the states.
It doesn't matter exactly
what it looks like but
let's assume that the state
looks like states,
we have data, null, error,
null, things like that.
All right, so
when we start switching on the event type,
we might do something like case FETCH.
And then we could say console dot log,
starting to fetch data,
break and defaults break.
Okay, so I'm just gonna say,
window dot transition equals transition.
And we're going to attach this
directly to the window, so
we could start playing around with it.
And I encourage you to do the same thing
if you're playing around with things in
the scratchpad as well.
So we could transition again the state
doesn't matter right now, but
let's say that we have a type of FETCH.
Okay, so
now it says starting to fetch data, but
the immediate issue here is that.
The user or even something else
in the system can send that fetch
events multiple times and it begin
to start fetching data repetitively.
And so we want to avoid unwanted
states and unwanted actions like that.
So that's why, let's just assume
that we have a status over here.
So let's say that we have
status of idle and so
we have starting to fetch data, break.
It's something that we would typically do,
well actually first
let's change the state.
So we're going to return status loading
and we're going to see if that's and
just as a follow through,
we're going to return the state.
Okay, so now, if we transition status,
let's say that we're idle and
we send the FETCH events.
Okay, so now it says status loading, but
what happens if the status
is already loading?
It's going to fetch data again and so this
is something that you might immediately
see if you start clicking
a button multiple times.
So your first inclination would be
probably to have a little bit of
defensive logic to solve this problem.
So we would say,
if state dot status is not loading,
Then we're going to start to fetch data.
So now again, if the status is loading and
we sent fetch, nothing happens.
And so this is the first step to starting
to think in terms of states first.
So instead of switching
on the events type first,
what we really want to do is
switch some finite state.
So we could use the status
in this example and
say switch state dot status,
and then say case idle.
And now we could do our same fetch
data over here and so case loading.
We could have maybe some other behavior,
break and then defaults, break.
And then, now what you could do in here
and this might look a little bit ugly.
But you could switch on the events
dot type if you have multiple events.
Or if you're only handling
a couple of events per state,
what I'd like to do is just
put it in an if statement.
So I say, if event dot type is fetch, then
we're going to start loading the data.
And then we're going
to return that status,
otherwise, we're just
going to return the state.
And so now, we're going to see
that if we have idle over here.
It's going to start to fetch data and it's
going to return our next date of loading.
And so now, when we load it again,
like I showed you over here,
it's not going to do anything.
So keep in mind the difference
between doing this and
taking a state first approach and
taking an events first approach.
With the state first approach,
we don't need to have defensive logic,
again this could just
be a switch statements.
And we don't need to cover up
any impossible transitions or
states that might arise by
doing things events first.
And so the big reason for
this is the way we define finite states.
Finite states in state machines and
state charts,
what these represents are behaviors.
And so, a behavior is how the application
is going to react based on an events.
The example I'd like to give is,
as humans we're either asleep or awake and
those are two different behaviors.
So we could call those states, I'm either
in the asleep state or the awake state.
And the reason that I would distinguish
between those two states is because.
I'm going to react differently to events
when I'm asleep rather than when I'm
awake.
And so that should be a good guide for
thinking about like how to
separate the different reactions
to events in your application.
So for example with this fetch logic or
separating the idle behavior
from the loading behavior.
In idle, when the events fetch is sent,
then we should start fetching data.
In the loading behavior, when the fetch
event is sent, nothing should happen.
So, that's a good way to distinguish
what the different behaviors are.
So, one more thing before
I get to the exercise.
We could also represent
this state first approach,
which is actually a finite state machine.
We could represent this as
an object instead and again,
we're not going to be using any libraries.
I'm just going to be using
an object as a lookup table, so
I'm going to call this const machine and
I'm going to give it an initial state.
So remember, I'm just using this as a pure
lookup table rather than something.
That we inject into a library, which
we're gonna be doing in the next lesson.
So let's say I give the initial
state of idle and so
now I have a bunch of states, so
I have idle and I have loading.
So inside this object,
I could specify that on the FETCH events,
we should go to the loading states.
And we'll just keep it simple for
now and keep it like this.
By the way, the reason that I'm not just
putting fetched directly on the object.
Is because we might want to,
or in the future,
we're going to want to add entry and
exit actions and other things.
So this object doesn't just
represent transitions, but
it could represent other things as well.
All right, so how do we use
this machine to actually work
the same way as this
transition machine over here.
I'm gonna call this transition2, and
let's give it a states and an event.
So, now instead of creating
this big switch statements,
we could just look it up on the object.
And we could say const nextStates
equals the machine dot states.
And we're going to be grabbing the,
let's just grab the state over here.
And remember we're putting
it on state dot status,
the finite state and
then on which might or
might not exist and the events dot type.
Now, if this doesn't give us a state,
like if it's an event
that we don't handle.
Then we're just going to
return the current state and
then we could return status,
next status, just like that.
So window dot transition2 equals
transition2 and let's test it out.
So I'm also going to be exporting or
sharing the machine as well,
so window dot machine equals machine.
And so if I console dot log the machine,
we're going to see that we
have our machine over here.
And then transition2,
now we could build up this initial
states with status machine dot initial.
Because we have it over here
in a nice convenient property,
and then we're going to send the events.
Again we are going to be sending
a FETCH event and so what happens is,
it takes us to the loading state.
So this is going to work exactly
the same way as our switch statements.
And it's going to default to
staying at the same state
if there are no transitions to find for
that events.
So whichever way you decide to
write it without a library,
whether you're using an object or
a switch statements, it's up to you.
The question was,
is the transition function a reducer?
Yes, the transition function
is essentially a reducer.
So if you're used to Redux or
view X or NGR X or
any of those other libraries
that make use of these reducers,
then it's pretty much
the exact same thing.
Some of the differences though,
are that while it does return the next
date in response to a state in an event.
It could also contain other things too
which we're going to be seeing in the X
state.
And it sort of has this specific structure
where this state is going to have
some sort of field that represents
the finite states of the machine.
And of course it could represent
other things as well but
conceptually you can
think of it as a reducer.
So again, going over the building blocks
of what a finite state machine is.
Now that we seen it in code,
let's take a look at it visually.
So we have the idle state and
that was our initial state.
So, we also have a symbol
that represents that
this is an initial state,
now we also have loading.
And so you could see these
states are represented by boxes.
So now if we want to describe how the idle
state moves to the loading states.
In state machine notation we would
just draw an arrow like this and
then we would add the events
that causes the transition.
So, in this case, we have a fetch event.
So now the graphical
representation of this
logic is exactly the same as
we're expressing it in code.
Whether it's using the object or
using the the switch statements.
And so to follow this,
you would first look for
the initial state in this case it's idle.
And then depending on what
events the machine receives,
you would follow the arrow.
So let's say we're in idle and
the fetch event happened.
So we're going to follow this
arrow from idle to loading because
that's where the fetch
transition takes us.
So now if we get a fetch
event in the loading states
then nothing is going to happen.
And the reason nothing is going to happen
is because there's no outgoing transitions
from the loading state.
And so this is exactly what the finite
state machine really helps with,
is preventing impossible states and
transitions.
If instead we had this arrow just floating
randomly and going to the loading state.
Then there are the chance that we
could have unintended transitions.
But because this is a well defined visual
formalism, we know that it's impossible.
For a fetch events to do anything
when we're in the loading states,
just looking at the graph we
could see nothing should happen.